# The Millennium Project

Unlike *The Phoenix Project* or *The Unicorn Project* — fictional
accounts of how broken IT systems are rescued through Agile and DevOps
principles — *The Millennium Project* did not recover into a
transformation tale. Instead, it stands as a sobering real-world
counterpoint: a complete failure that cost Swedish taxpayers 5.5
billion SEK and delivered neither the promised functionality nor trust
in its outcomes.

The failure of the Millennium electronic health record (EHR) system in
Sweden's Västra Götalandsregionen (VGR) is not an isolated
incident. It reflects a recurring pattern seen across industries,
sectors, and national contexts: the repeated collapse of large-scale
technology initiatives under the weight of outdated methodologies,
rigid planning, and insufficient adaptation. Despite decades of agile
rhetoric, organizational behavior often remains locked in
waterfall-era thinking.

We are not short on methodologies, frameworks, or success stories. We
have case studies. We have books. We have decades of lessons learned
from both the private and public sectors. Yet time and again, when
faced with high-stakes, high-cost transformation projects, we default
to control-driven, plan-heavy models that have already failed us. The
central question is not whether we know better. We do. The central
question is: **Why do we never learn?**

### The Anatomy of a Failure

Millennium was envisioned as a unified, modern EHR solution that would
streamline healthcare delivery across VGR. It was meant to consolidate
fragmented systems, reduce inefficiencies, and enable better patient
outcomes through accessible, accurate health data. It had strategic
importance and massive public investment. But its deployment quickly
unraveled. Reports surfaced of lost data, system instability, and
workflows that clashed with clinical realities.

Healthcare professionals, the very people the system was meant to
support, felt unheard and excluded. Instead of improving their
day-to-day experience, Millennium added friction and confusion. Trust
deteriorated, not just in the technology, but in the leadership behind
it. Within weeks of its launch, the project was paused.

Beneath these surface symptoms were deeper flaws: top-down governance,
insufficient iterative testing, poor user involvement, and a
commitment to requirements rather than outcomes. None of these are new
problems. They are painfully familiar. The fact that they recurred is
more telling than the failure itself.

### The Illusion of Certainty

The roots of the failure lie in a broader pattern—an organizational
yearning for certainty. Leaders want predictable timelines, clear
deliverables, and risk-free execution. Traditional project management
offers this illusion of control. It turns the unknown into a plan, the
complex into a checklist. But modern systems development is not a
linear construction project; it's a learning journey.

In Millennium's case, the belief that comprehensive upfront planning
could eliminate risk was its downfall. Requirements were gathered
early, locked in, and handed down to development teams and
vendors. Testing occurred late, often in idealized or siloed
environments. Real-world complexity and user variation were introduced
far too late to make meaningful course corrections.

This approach is not unique to VGR. It reflects a dominant mindset in
many large institutions: if we plan well enough, problems will be
prevented. But in complex systems, planning is not enough. Discovery
must be ongoing. Learning must be continuous.

### Why We Don't Learn

So why don't we evolve? Why do we repeat the same mistakes, even when
the evidence is abundant? Part of the answer lies in institutional
culture.

Organizations often mistake adherence to process for progress. They
conflate documentation with understanding. They reward delivery of
scope over delivery of value. This is especially true in bureaucratic
settings where career incentives are tied more to optics than to
outcomes.

Admitting uncertainty is politically dangerous. Changing course is
seen as weakness. And so, people at every level learn to protect
themselves: don't ask uncomfortable questions, don't challenge the
plan, don't point out that the emperor has no clothes.

In this context, learning isn't just absent. It's actively
suppressed. Systems are designed to resist reflection, to ignore
dissenting voices, and to maintain the illusion of control. This is
how avoidable failures become inevitable.

### A Contrast in Philosophy: Outcome-Based Agile

The [Outcome-Based Agile Framework (OBAF)](https://github.com/sa6mwa/obaf)
offers a fundamentally different model. Where traditional approaches
seek to control complexity, OBAF seeks to adapt within it. It doesn't
eliminate uncertainty; it embraces it.

OBAF begins not with features but with outcomes—measurable changes in
user behavior, system performance, or strategic value. It prioritizes
real-world impact over contractual completion. It treats requirements
as constraints, not blueprints.

Key tenets of OBAF include:

- **Continuous Discovery**: Work evolves through close contact with
  reality. Assumptions are tested early and often.
- **Evidence-Driven Decisions**: Progress is measured by validated
  learning, not by milestone checklists.
- **Autonomy Within Constraints**: Teams are empowered to own problems
  and explore solutions, while respecting necessary boundaries.
- **Blameless Retrospectives**: Learning is institutionalized through
  psychologically safe reflections that explore what happened and why,
  without personal blame.

Had Millennium been guided by these principles, its trajectory could
have been different. A phased, outcome-focused rollout could have
revealed usability issues before they escalated. User feedback could
have informed design in real-time. The system could have evolved in
partnership with its users, not in opposition to them.

### The Deeper Cost of Failure

When projects like Millennium fail, the damage is profound. The
financial cost is visible and staggering: 5.5 billion SEK. But the
less visible damage—to trust, morale, and credibility—is even more
significant.

Clinicians lose faith in digital tools. Public servants become more
risk-averse. Citizens grow cynical about how their tax money is
spent. And the next innovation project starts under a shadow of
skepticism. Failure doesn't just reset progress. It lowers the ceiling
for what's considered possible next time.

### Conclusion: Choosing to Learn

Learning is not a passive byproduct of failure. It is a choice—a
cultural commitment to reflection, adaptation, and humility. It
requires leaders to prioritize outcomes over optics and to create
environments where evidence, not hierarchy, guides decisions.

We "never learn" not because we lack intelligence or tools, but
because we fail to confront the systems and incentives that make not
learning the path of least resistance.

The case of Millennium should not just be a warning. It should be a
turning point. If we are willing to examine not just what failed but
why it failed—and to do so honestly, without defensiveness—then we can
do better.

And we must. Because the next system we build won't just affect
workflows or budgets. It will affect lives.

The choice is still ours.
